---
layout: page
title: Dungeon
---

Dungeon is a text-based open-world role-playing-game. You are in control of the
life of a character that wakes up with a headache and can't remember exactly
what happened to him. You need to do your best to equip yourself to explore
Darrowmere scavenging for powerful and valuable treasure.

You are completely free to explore Darrowmere however you want. Be it slaying
the most terrible creatures, drinking milk directly from cows, or reading books
found in the world to learn about its history and the lives of some of the
Commons (the human-like race of Darrowmere) that lived there. Some books may
even teach your character magical spells that give him some advantage when
dealing with the aberrations roaming the land.

The world is randomly generated, making each and every experience unique. There
is also an in-game wiki with a lot of information about the different facets of
the game. You can preview this wiki
[here](https://github.com/mafagafogigante/dungeon/wiki).

Screenshots
-----------
[See the gallery](http://mafagafogigante.org/dungeon/screenshots/).

Awards
------

In 2017 this project won Yegor Bugayenko's Software Quality Award.

![Software Quality Award]({{ site.baseurl
}}/assets/dungeon/software-quality-award.png)

Tools
-----

### YourKit

![YourKit](https://www.yourkit.com/images/yklogo.png)

YourKit supports open source projects with its full-featured Java Profiler.
YourKit, LLC is the creator of [YourKit Java
Profiler](https://www.yourkit.com/java/profiler/) and [YourKit .NET
Profiler](https://www.yourkit.com/.net/profiler/), innovative and intelligent
tools for profiling Java and .NET applications.

Running the game
----------------
[Download a release](https://github.com/mafagafogigante/dungeon/releases).

You only need an updated version of Java to play this game.

Reporting bugs
--------------
Bug reports, questions, and suggestions are welcome on our [issue
tracker](https://github.com/mafagafogigante/dungeon/issues).

Contributing
------------
If you know Java, Python, or even if you just know English well, you can
contribute.

Check out the [issue
tracker](https://github.com/mafagafogigante/dungeon/issues) to see what could
be done or figure out something you would like to do and start working on it.

Discussing your ideas on the tracker before coding is a good way to increase
the chance of your changes being accepted.

Do not forget to also read the project's contributing guide
[here](https://github.com/mafagafogigante/dungeon/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md).

Versioning scheme
-----------------
Dungeon uses [semantic versioning](http://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html).

- A release that is **incompatible with old saved files** increases the
  **MAJOR** version.
- A release that adds **content** in a backwards-compatible manner increases
  the **MINOR** version.
- A release that makes backwards-compatible **bug fixes** increases the
  **PATCH** version.

License
-------
[BSD 3-Clause](https://github.com/mafagafogigante/dungeon/blob/master/LICENSE.txt).
