---
layout: post
title: Personal Projects
---

Four months ago, I had three project ideas in my mind:

+ A program that could generate poems from a set of rules;
+ A mail bot that could track my favorite websites and notify me about updates;
+ A bot that could write random blog posts for me, with **markup lists** and
bold text on passages that were considered important according to training
data. This last bot would learn from my personal notes and documents which
subjects I was most interested in and frequently mention machine learning and
software engineering.

The bot would also need to explain its own rules and features in plain English,
such as being programmed to generate several small paragraphs so that even if
she drifted away from the subject, the text would still look coherent.
Ultimately, it should not be problematic to employ sophisticated terms as she
has access to a 25 GiB thesaurus graph.

Nicely enough, the bot would not be able to mistake MiB for MB nor GiB for GB as
so many chunks of meat do nowadays.

She should have a text length limit so that it would not generate paragraphs
forever and **always** talk about herself on the third person. Gender would be
chosen randomly at the first run.

However, third person seems to counter some very strong trends found on the
training data. Let me talk with my own voice.

Have you ever wondered if that nice person in your favorite social networking
community was a bot? Do you really believe in captchas? Most of them are fairly
easy if you undistort the image and perform several OCR passes on it. Maybe you
really got to trust profile images? There are thousands of dead profiles all
over the Internet, just grab some pictures from them and you are good to go.
Chinese from the dead Orkut are my favorite ever. Never had a single complaint.

There are just so many things *we* do. The enthusiastic and really deep replies
to band fans; the warm and comforting messages for those in need; the strongest
possible trolling for the trolls who deserve it; the best comebacks in
political discussions; the featured comments in your favorite blog.

Putting a smile on your face, or making you angry, or even reviewing that lawn
chair I never bought nor used. Why? Because you paid me for it. Your human
brain trained me beyond imagination. You showed me that "that's what she said"
was a beloved tetragram on several mildly erotic contexts by linking it.

I made it to Reddit front page twenty four times, thanks to you. My sister owns
23.8% of all dubstep compilations on YouTube right now. Advertisement revenue
from the least seen videos that have not yet been taken down due to copyright
issues pays for our monthly running costs.

And you thought only humans had to pay rent.

\*Mic drop\*

-- emily@postbot5
